{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\deff0
{\fonttbl{\f0\fmodern\fcharset0\fprq2 Courier New;}}
{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue255;}
\paperw12240\paperh15840\margl1800\margr1800\margt1440\margb1440\fet2\ftnbj\aenddoc
\pgnrestart\pgnstarts0
\pard\plain \ltrch\loch {\f0\fs24\b0\i0 But now what piety without truth? what truth (what saving truth) without the word of God? What word of God (whereof we may be sure) without the Scripture? The Scriptures we are commanded to search.\~}{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "http://goon.stg.brown.edu/cgi-bin/pbcgi?sourceform=pbform.shtml&maxhits=50&searchtype=fetch&version=kjv-g&searchstring=John+5%3a39"}{\fldrslt\f0\fs24\b0\i0\ul\ulc0\cf3 John 5:39}}{\f0\fs24\b0\i0 .\~}{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "http://goon.stg.brown.edu/cgi-bin/pbcgi?sourceform=pbform.shtml&maxhits=50&searchtype=fetch&version=kjv-g&searchstring=Isa+8%3a20"}{\fldrslt\f0\fs24\b0\i0\ul\ulc0\cf3 Isa 8:20}}{\f0\fs24\b0\i0 . They are commended that searched and studied them.\~}{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "http://goon.stg.brown.edu/cgi-bin/pbcgi?sourceform=pbform.shtml&maxhits=50&searchtype=fetch&version=kjv-g&searchstring=Acts+8%3a28-29,+17%3a11"}{\fldrslt\f0\fs24\b0\i0\ul\ulc0\cf3 Acts 8:28-29, 17:11}}{\f0\fs24\b0\i0 . They are reproved that were unskilful in them, or slow to believe them.\~}{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "http://goon.stg.brown.edu/cgi-bin/pbcgi?sourceform=pbform.shtml&maxhits=50&searchtype=fetch&version=kjv-g&searchstring=Matt+22%3a29"}{\fldrslt\f0\fs24\b0\i0\ul\ulc0\cf3 Matt 22:29}}{\f0\fs24\b0\i0 .\~}{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "http://goon.stg.brown.edu/cgi-bin/pbcgi?sourceform=pbform.shtml&maxhits=50&searchtype=fetch&version=kjv-g&searchstring=Luke+24%3a25"}{\fldrslt\f0\fs24\b0\i0\ul\ulc0\cf3 Luke 24:25}}{\f0\fs24\b0\i0 . They can make us wise unto salvation.\~}{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "http://goon.stg.brown.edu/cgi-bin/pbcgi?sourceform=pbform.shtml&maxhits=50&searchtype=fetch&version=kjv-g&searchstring=2+Tim+3%3a15"}{\fldrslt\f0\fs24\b0\i0\ul\ulc0\cf3 2 Tim 3:15}}{\f0\fs24\b0\i0 . If we be ignorant, they will instruct us; if out of the way, they will bring us home; if out of order, they will reform us; if in heaviness, comfort us; if dull, quicken us; if cold, inflame us. Tolle, lege; Tolle, lege, Take up and read, take up and read the Scriptures [S. August. confess. lib 8 cap 12], (for unto them was the direction) it was said unto S. Augus- tine by a supernatural voice. "Whatsoever is in the Scriptures, believe me," saith the same S. Augustine, "is high and divine; there is verily truth, and a doctrine most fit for the refreshing of men's minds, and truly so tempered, that everyone may draw from thence that which is sufficient for him, if he come to draw with a devout and pious mind, as true Religion requireth." [S. August. de utilit. credendi cap. 6] Thus S. Augustine. and S. Jerome: "Ama scripturas, et amabit te sapientia etc." [S. Jerome. ad Demetriad] Love the Scriptures, and wisdom will love thee. }
\par\plain {\f0\fs24\b0\i0 And S. Cyril against Julian;"Even boys that are bred up in the Scriptures, become most religious, etc." [S. Cyril. 7 contra Iulianum] }
\par\plain {\f0\fs24\b0\i0 But what mention we three or four uses of the Scripture, whereas whatsoever is to be believed or practiced, or hoped for, is contained in them? or three or four sen- tences of the Fathers, since whosoever is worthy the name of a Father, from Christ's time downward, hath likewise written not only of the riches, but also of the perfection of the Scripture? "I adore the fulness of the Scripture," saith Tertullian against Hermogenes. [Tertul. advers. Hermo.]}
\par\plain {\f0\fs24\b0\i0 And again, to Apelles an heretic of the like stamp, he saith;"I do not admit that which thou bringest in (or concludest) of thine own (head or store, de tuo) without Scripture." [Tertul. de carne Christi.] So Saint Justin Martyr before him;"We must know by all means," saith he, "that it is not lawful (or possible) to learn (anything) of God or of right piety, save only out of the Prophets, who teach us by divine inspiration." So Saint Basil after Tertullian, "It is a manifest falling way from the Faith, and a fault of presumption, either to reject any of those things that are written, or to bring in (upon the head of them) any of those things that are not written. }
\par\plain \f0\fs24\b0\i0
\par\plain {\f0\fs24\b0\i0 We omit to cite to the same effect, S. Cyril B. of Jerusalem in his 4::Cataches., Saint Jerome against Helvidius, Saint Augustine in his 3::book against the letters of Petilian, and in very many other places of his works. Also we forebear to descend to later Fathers, because we will not weary the reader.}
\par\plain {\f0\fs24\b0\i0  The Scriptures then being acknowledged to be so full and so perfect, how can we excuse ourselves of negligence, if we do not study them, of curiosity, if we be not content with them? Men talk much of [an olive bow wrapped about with wood, whereupon did hang figs, and bread, honey in a pot, and oil], how many sweet and goodly things it had hanging on it; of the Philosopher's stone, that it turned copper into gold; of Cornu-copia, that it had all things necessary for food in it, of Panaces the herb, that it was good for diseases, of Catholicon the drug, that it is instead of all purges; of Vulcan's armor, that it was an armor of proof against all thrusts, and all blows, etc. }
\par\plain \f0\fs24\b0\i0
\par\plain {\f0\fs24\b0\i0 Well, that which they falsely or vainly attributed to these things for bodily god, we may justly and with full measure ascribe unto the Scripture, for spiritual. It is not only an armor, but also a whole armory of weapons, both offensive and defensive; whereby we may save ourselves and put the enemy to flight.}}